README.md, before:

# System Programming Project

## Overview
This project is developed as part of the System Programming course.
It is a simple Student Information System implemented using Docker technology.

The system runs as two separate containers: a C++ application container
and a PostgreSQL database container.

## Technologies Used
- C++
- PostgreSQL
- Docker
- Docker Compose
- GitHub

## System Structure
- PostgreSQL container is used to store student data.
- C++ command-line application connects to the database and performs operations.

## Functions
- Add student information
- List student records
- Update student data
- Delete student data

## Development Process
- Branch-based development strategy is used.
- All changes are made via Pull Requests.
- Code reviews are required before merging.

## Project Status
Initial setup phase.

---

# Week 2 – Docker Setup and Containerization Report

## Objective
The objective of Week 2 was to introduce Docker technology into the project and prepare the system for container-based development. The focus was on creating the Docker environment, configuring Dockerfiles, and understanding container behavior.

---

## Work Completed
During Week 2, the following tasks were completed:

- Docker was installed and configured on the development environment.
- A Dockerfile was created for the C++ application.
- The base operating system image (Ubuntu) was selected.
- Required build tools were installed inside the container:
  - g++
  - make
  - cmake
- The C++ application was successfully compiled inside the Docker container.
- Basic container lifecycle commands were tested (`build`, `run`, `stop`).

---

## Dockerfile Configuration
A Dockerfile was prepared to containerize the C++ application.  
The Dockerfile defines:

- The base image
- Required build dependencies
- Build steps for the C++ project
- The default command executed when the container starts

This ensured that the application could be built and run consistently across different environments.

---

## Container Execution Test
The Docker image was built and executed successfully using the following commands:

```bash
docker build -t sis-app .
docker run sis-app
```
## Version Control Usage
All development activities during this phase were managed using Git and GitHub.

- A branch-based development workflow was followed.
- New features and configuration changes were implemented in separate branches.
- Pull Requests were used to merge changes into the main branch.
- Clear and descriptive commit messages were written.
- Code reviews were performed before merging.

This version control strategy ensured collaboration, traceability, and code quality throughout the project.

---

## Results
- The Docker environment was successfully configured.
- The C++ application was containerized and executed inside a Docker container.
- Required build tools and dependencies were installed correctly.
- The application ran consistently across different environments using Docker.
- The project repository structure was prepared for multi-container integration in later weeks.

---

## Conclusion
This phase of the project successfully established a solid foundation using Docker and Git-based version control.  
Containerization improved portability and reproducibility, while structured version control practices ensured organized and collaborative development.  
These results prepared the project for database integration and full system deployment in subsequent weeks.


## Week 3 – PostgreSQL Integration Report

### Objective
Integrate PostgreSQL into the Student Information System project using Docker Compose and prepare the C++ application environment for database connectivity.

### Work Completed
- PostgreSQL service was added using Docker Compose.
- Database credentials (DB name, user, password) were defined via environment variables.
- Persistent volume was configured for PostgreSQL data.
- Healthcheck was implemented using `pg_isready`.
- Application service was configured to wait for the database using `depends_on` with `service_healthy`.
- Dockerfile was updated to include:
  - g++
  - cmake
  - make
  - libpqxx-dev
  - postgresql-client
- A dummy PostgreSQL connection message was implemented in the C++ application.

### Dummy PostgreSQL Connection (C++)
The application simulates a PostgreSQL connection to verify Docker and dependency setup.

```cpp
std::cout << "Dummy PostgreSQL connection successful (Week 3)" << std::endl;

```
## Week 4 – Application and Database Integration Report

### Objective
The objective of Week 4 was to complete the full integration between the C++ application and the PostgreSQL database and to verify that the system works correctly as a complete containerized application.

---

### System Architecture
The system consists of two Docker containers managed using Docker Compose:

- **PostgreSQL Database Container**  
  Responsible for storing student information and initializing the database using an `init.sql` script.

- **C++ Application Container**  
  A command-line application that connects to the PostgreSQL database using the `libpqxx` library and executes SQL queries.

The containers communicate over Docker’s internal network using the service name `db`.

---

### Database Initialization
The PostgreSQL database is automatically initialized during the first startup of the container.  
The `init.sql` script performs the following operations:

- Creates the `students` table
- Inserts sample student data

This ensures that the database schema and initial records are available without any manual setup.

---

### Application–Database Connection
The C++ application establishes a connection to the PostgreSQL database using the following configuration:

- Host: `db`
- Port: `5432`
- Database name: `sis_user`
- User: `sis_user`

The successful connection is confirmed by log messages printed to the console from the application container.

---

### Data Retrieval Test
After establishing the connection, the application executes the following SQL query:

```sql
SELECT * FROM students;
```
## CRUD Operations Demonstration
In addition to data retrieval, basic CRUD-related operations were demonstrated to validate database interaction capabilities.

- **Insert Operation:**  
  A new test student record was inserted into the PostgreSQL database using an SQL `INSERT` command executed from the C++ application.

- **Delete Operation:**  
  The inserted test record was removed from the database using an SQL `DELETE` command.

These operations confirm that the application can both read from and write to the database.

---

## Error Handling and Validation
Basic error handling mechanisms were implemented in the C++ application using exception handling provided by the **libpqxx** library.

- Database connection errors are captured and printed to the console.
- SQL execution errors are handled gracefully.
- Connection status is verified before executing database operations.

This improves the robustness and stability of the system.

---

## Logging and Verification
System behavior was verified using Docker container logs and status checks.

Application logs were inspected using:
```bash
docker logs sis-app-v2
```

## Results
- PostgreSQL container started successfully and passed the health check.
- Database tables and sample data were created using the `init.sql` script.
- The C++ application connected to the PostgreSQL database without errors.
- Student records were successfully retrieved from the database.
- Basic insert and delete operations were executed and verified.

---

## Version Control and Collaboration
All Week 4 developments were carried out using a branch-based Git workflow.

- Feature branches were used during development.
- Pull Requests were created to merge changes into the `main` branch.
- Clear and descriptive commit messages were used.
- Code changes were reviewed before merging.

This workflow ensured traceability, collaboration, and code quality throughout the project.

---

## Conclusion
Week 4 successfully demonstrates a fully working containerized Student Information System.  
The integration between Docker, PostgreSQL, and the C++ application was completed, and database operations were verified through real-time application output.  
The system meets all Week 4 requirements and provides a solid foundation for further development.

Commit message:

docs: update README with Docker Hub information
Added an optional Docker Hub section explaining the application image and its usage.

README.md, after:

# System Programming Project

## Overview
This project is developed as part of the System Programming course.
It is a simple Student Information System implemented using Docker technology.

The system runs as two separate containers: a C++ application container
and a PostgreSQL database container.

## Technologies Used
- C++
- PostgreSQL
- Docker
- Docker Compose
- GitHub

## System Structure
- PostgreSQL container is used to store student data.
- C++ command-line application connects to the database and performs operations.

## Functions
- Add student information
- List student records
- Update student data
- Delete student data

## Docker Hub

An optional Docker image for the C++ application container is available on Docker Hub:

https://hub.docker.com/r/emirhantekin/sis-app

This image represents the application container used in the project.  
However, the project is primarily designed to be built and executed locally using Docker Compose.

To pull the image manually (optional):

```bash
docker pull emirhantekin/sis-app:latest

## Development Process
- Branch-based development strategy is used.
- All changes are made via Pull Requests.
- Code reviews are required before merging.

## Project Status
Initial setup phase.

---

# Week 2 – Docker Setup and Containerization Report

## Objective
The objective of Week 2 was to introduce Docker technology into the project and prepare the system for container-based development. The focus was on creating the Docker environment, configuring Dockerfiles, and understanding container behavior.

---

## Work Completed
During Week 2, the following tasks were completed:

- Docker was installed and configured on the development environment.
- A Dockerfile was created for the C++ application.
- The base operating system image (Ubuntu) was selected.
- Required build tools were installed inside the container:
  - g++
  - make
  - cmake
- The C++ application was successfully compiled inside the Docker container.
- Basic container lifecycle commands were tested (`build`, `run`, `stop`).

---

## Dockerfile Configuration
A Dockerfile was prepared to containerize the C++ application.  
The Dockerfile defines:

- The base image
- Required build dependencies
- Build steps for the C++ project
- The default command executed when the container starts

This ensured that the application could be built and run consistently across different environments.

---

## Container Execution Test
The Docker image was built and executed successfully using the following commands:

```bash
docker build -t sis-app .
docker run sis-app
```
## Version Control Usage
All development activities during this phase were managed using Git and GitHub.

- A branch-based development workflow was followed.
- New features and configuration changes were implemented in separate branches.
- Pull Requests were used to merge changes into the main branch.
- Clear and descriptive commit messages were written.
- Code reviews were performed before merging.

This version control strategy ensured collaboration, traceability, and code quality throughout the project.

---

## Results
- The Docker environment was successfully configured.
- The C++ application was containerized and executed inside a Docker container.
- Required build tools and dependencies were installed correctly.
- The application ran consistently across different environments using Docker.
- The project repository structure was prepared for multi-container integration in later weeks.

---

## Conclusion
This phase of the project successfully established a solid foundation using Docker and Git-based version control.  
Containerization improved portability and reproducibility, while structured version control practices ensured organized and collaborative development.  
These results prepared the project for database integration and full system deployment in subsequent weeks.


## Week 3 – PostgreSQL Integration Report

### Objective
Integrate PostgreSQL into the Student Information System project using Docker Compose and prepare the C++ application environment for database connectivity.

### Work Completed
- PostgreSQL service was added using Docker Compose.
- Database credentials (DB name, user, password) were defined via environment variables.
- Persistent volume was configured for PostgreSQL data.
- Healthcheck was implemented using `pg_isready`.
- Application service was configured to wait for the database using `depends_on` with `service_healthy`.
- Dockerfile was updated to include:
  - g++
  - cmake
  - make
  - libpqxx-dev
  - postgresql-client
- A dummy PostgreSQL connection message was implemented in the C++ application.

### Dummy PostgreSQL Connection (C++)
The application simulates a PostgreSQL connection to verify Docker and dependency setup.

```cpp
std::cout << "Dummy PostgreSQL connection successful (Week 3)" << std::endl;

```
## Week 4 – Application and Database Integration Report

### Objective
The objective of Week 4 was to complete the full integration between the C++ application and the PostgreSQL database and to verify that the system works correctly as a complete containerized application.

---

### System Architecture
The system consists of two Docker containers managed using Docker Compose:

- **PostgreSQL Database Container**  
  Responsible for storing student information and initializing the database using an `init.sql` script.

- **C++ Application Container**  
  A command-line application that connects to the PostgreSQL database using the `libpqxx` library and executes SQL queries.

The containers communicate over Docker’s internal network using the service name `db`.

---

### Database Initialization
The PostgreSQL database is automatically initialized during the first startup of the container.  
The `init.sql` script performs the following operations:

- Creates the `students` table
- Inserts sample student data

This ensures that the database schema and initial records are available without any manual setup.

---

### Application–Database Connection
The C++ application establishes a connection to the PostgreSQL database using the following configuration:

- Host: `db`
- Port: `5432`
- Database name: `sis_user`
- User: `sis_user`

The successful connection is confirmed by log messages printed to the console from the application container.

---

### Data Retrieval Test
After establishing the connection, the application executes the following SQL query:

```sql
SELECT * FROM students;
```
## CRUD Operations Demonstration
In addition to data retrieval, basic CRUD-related operations were demonstrated to validate database interaction capabilities.

- **Insert Operation:**  
  A new test student record was inserted into the PostgreSQL database using an SQL `INSERT` command executed from the C++ application.

- **Delete Operation:**  
  The inserted test record was removed from the database using an SQL `DELETE` command.

These operations confirm that the application can both read from and write to the database.

---

## Error Handling and Validation
Basic error handling mechanisms were implemented in the C++ application using exception handling provided by the **libpqxx** library.

- Database connection errors are captured and printed to the console.
- SQL execution errors are handled gracefully.
- Connection status is verified before executing database operations.

This improves the robustness and stability of the system.

---

## Logging and Verification
System behavior was verified using Docker container logs and status checks.

Application logs were inspected using:
```bash
docker logs sis-app-v2
```

## Results
- PostgreSQL container started successfully and passed the health check.
- Database tables and sample data were created using the `init.sql` script.
- The C++ application connected to the PostgreSQL database without errors.
- Student records were successfully retrieved from the database.
- Basic insert and delete operations were executed and verified.

---

## Version Control and Collaboration
All Week 4 developments were carried out using a branch-based Git workflow.

- Feature branches were used during development.
- Pull Requests were created to merge changes into the `main` branch.
- Clear and descriptive commit messages were used.
- Code changes were reviewed before merging.

This workflow ensured traceability, collaboration, and code quality throughout the project.

---

## Conclusion
Week 4 successfully demonstrates a fully working containerized Student Information System.  
The integration between Docker, PostgreSQL, and the C++ application was completed, and database operations were verified through real-time application output.  
The system meets all Week 4 requirements and provides a solid foundation for further development.
